Welcome to Introduction to Kotlin and
Android App Development.
My name is Maximiliano Firtman,
I can go by Max.
I know it's a long name.
And we have a full day
creating an app on Android.
So we're going to learn Kotlin and also a
little bit about Android app development.
So we're going to be
building an app today.
Really, really quickly,
I'm a mobile web developer.
So I have been doing websites and
web app with HTML, CSS,
JavaScript, and all the other
technologies since end of 1995.
And also I have started doing
mobile apps in around 2001.
So that's of course before
the Android existed.
So I did the Java on Nokia devices, CNBM,
Blackberries and
many other of these old phones.
And then I have started doing
iOS applications and of course,
Android applications.
So I've been doing that for a lot.
I'm from Argentina,
I'm actually living there in Buenos Aires.
In terms of my Android experience,
I have published around 20 apps mostly for
customers, so not on my name.
So I've been doing consulting and
creating apps for those companies.
I have started doing Android specific Java
development in 2012, so ten years ago.
So on Kotlin,
when actually first started in the market,
maybe a few months after that in 2019.
That's all that I have for
you at this point in terms of who I am,
it's time to start.
So we're going to cover today,
the basics of Kotlin.
Kotlin by the way,
it's the language that we're going to use.
It's kind of a new language compare
with other languages that we have in
the market.
It appear in the past five years,
and they go into the Android Studio.
In fact, one of their requirements for
the workshop is for
you to install Android Studio.
So you can go and do that right now.
It's a free tool available for
Windows, Mac, and Linux.
So we're going to see how to test and
debug our Android applications.
You don't need a phone or a tablet.
So if you don't have an Android phone,
it's okay.
We will be able to use
the emulators as well.
We are going to design
our app with a framework,
a library, known as JetPack Compose.
It's actually a new UI framework and
new UI toolkit from the Android team.
So it's actually one of the official
ways that we have to create
Android applications.
So we are going to see how to navigate
between screens using this framework,
how to work with data,
cloud integrated data model, and
how to connect with web services.
So we have a website, we are going
to download some data from there.
And then we will have also a way to
communicate that app with a web app.
So if you have a website, or a web app,
you will be able to communicate your
Android native application
with that web app.
So there is a way to render web apps
within an Android application and
also to bridge Kotlin with JavaScript.
So you can execute Kotlin from
JavaScript and vice versa.
So that's the idea for today.
By the way, also there,
you have the slides,
a copy of the slides and
also an assets.zipfile, but
it's actually in the public folder in the
repository, I will show you that later.
Where you have some,
let's say SVG files, PNG files, and
some other files that we are going
to use later in our app, okay?
So the assets folder.
And in terms of your experience, if you
have experience with any OOP language, so
object oriented programming language,
you're okay.
I mean, if you you're a JavaScript
developer, a Java developer,
that's good enough.
With that, you're ready to start working
with Kotlin and Android app development.
Let's try to understand where we
are today in the frontend map.
So that is, we are here frontend masters,
so we are frontenders.
And today when you're doing frontend,
you have two main universes.
You can make a native clients or
you can make web apps, websites or
PWA Progressive Web Apps.
Today, we're going to
focus on native clients.
So we are going to create
a native client for a platform.
When you decide to go with
native clients today,
you can pick using official SDKs from
each platform or cross platform SDKs.
And today, we will focus on official SDKs.
Here, there are many platforms,
there are more than three but
just the main three ones, Android,
Apple, Platforms on Windows.
Today we will focus on Android,
you know that.
And then,
here on the Android official SDK world,
you can pick today different
languages that you can use.
You can use Java, Kotlin, or C and C++.
And today, we will be focusing on Kotlin.
Actually, most of the apps
that are leading today or
starting today are using Kotlin, okay?
So of course you can also mix,
within one particular project, you can
have some parts in Java, some parts
in Kotlin, and some parts in Z, okay?
So you can actually mix all these
technologies in the same project,
but we will be focused in Kotlin.
And in terms of the user interface,
even if you pick Kotlin, you have several
ways to design your application in terms
of how you build the user interface.
We have that something that has,
it's actually unnamed, so
we don't have a name for that.
But typically it's known as
a classic XML user interface.
So Android development from the beginning
was actually heavily based in XML files,
layout files.
That's the classic XML system.
We have XML with JetPack,
that's something that appeared in the past
few years also because that classic XML
system was sometimes a little problematic.
So the Android team created a set of
libraries on that JetPack to help
with that.
And then we have JetPack Compose that is
actually that under that JetPack umbrella,
but it's something completely new.
There are no XML files here.
So today, we're going to be
focusing there on JetPack Compose.
That is kind of the, I don't wanna say
the current way to do Android apps because
it's up to you if you want to use them.
It's still new,
it's still a new UI target.
So not every app today
is actually using it.
But it's becoming stable enough
to start working with it.
And some companies are starting
using it to create their own apps.
And fortunately for us, JetPack Compose
compared with the other UI toolkits,
it's actually simpler.
And let us make an app in one day.
Before JetPack Compose, I will say that
it was kind of impossible to actually
learn Kotlin and how to actually
build an app in just one day.
So that's our route, that's our map, okay?
So Kotlin, Android, JetPack Compose,
those are the three main topics
that we are going to cover today.
So we are going to be building one app,
it's called Coffee Masters.
The idea of the app is that,
we have a coffee shop, okay?
For frontend masters.
And we are going to make the app so
you can actually see the menu, and
you can order from there.
That's kind of the main deal of the app,
okay?
So we are going to build
this app from scratch.
So in the repository,
you have the steps, step by step.
But I'm going to be building that
manually directly in Android Studio.
So we're going to learn also how to
use Android Studio and how that works.
So it's for a coffee store,
we're going to use JetPack Compose.
And another important decision
that we need to make, but
actually I already made that decision.
Is that in terms of
the user interface today,
you can decide to create your own UI,
your own design, or
you can use the design
pattern from the OS, okay?
For example, if you take TikTok,
the TikTok application is
actually the same on iOS,
on Android, and even on the web.
So they have their own
TikTok user interface,
their own custom user interface.
They're not following directly
the guidelines from each OS.
We're going to use Material Design.
Material Design is a set of best
practices and even some controls,
some UI components that
we can use on Android.
It's open source and you can actually
use it on the web, material design, and
also on iOS if you want.
But we are going to be
using some of the ideas and
guidelines from
the material design system.
And as I mentioned before,
for the project,
you will need to download the assets that
are actually in the repository, okay?
Because we have the icons, some images,
some logos that we are going to use.
So we have a question on the chat
regarding picking frameworks like this
that are like official framework versus
cross-platform development such as
Xamarin or React Native.
So which one to use?
I think that there is no single answer.
I think that it depends on the project.
So there are projects that are suitable
for cross platform solutions,
such as Fluter, React Native,
Native Script, Microsoft, Xamarin.
And for other projects, it's maybe
a better idea to use Native SDKS.
Or let's say official
SDKs from the publisher,
such as JetPack Compose on Android or
Swift UI on iOS.
So there are advantages and
challenges on every decision you make.
But I don't think there is a single
answer when someone asked me,
are you using always these or always that?
My answer,
it typically depends on the app.
Because there are some apps that when
you get into the cross-platform idea,
you are getting to trouble or
lot of effort.
And for some app, it's pretty good.
So I think it depends on the app and
there are so many variables in that
decision that it's difficult to
give you a straight answer, okay?
Which one is better.
So it depends on the case, and
the good thing about learning
these things is that okay, you can
see these yourself or by yourself and
then make your decision on every project
on which one do you think fits better.